docs: added documentation for container authenticity and enforcement allowlist (#5205)
eclipse/kura: docs/core-services/container-orchestration-image-auth.md

# Kura Container Image Authenticity and Allowlist Enforcement feature

Containerized applications are becoming increasingly popular in the software ecosystem as a way to deploy and distrubute applications. As a result, ensuring the security of software supply chains has become a critical concern. Implementing best practices, such as signing and verifying images to mitigate man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks and validating their authenticity and freshness, play a pivotal role in safeguarding the integrity of the software supply chain.

To ensure the authenticity and integrity of the code within the container images, binding the image to a specific entity or organization via signature verification is crucial and increasingly common.

> The purpose of this document is to provide a high-level understanding of the Kura container authenticity and allowlist enforcement feature introduced with **Kura version 5.5.0**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of this document is to provide a high-level understanding of the Kura container authenticity and allowlist enforcement feature introduced with **Eclipse Kura version 5.5.0**.
```

## High-level flow

> The Kura container authenticity and allowlist enforcement feature is designed to address container authenticity concerns by providing a mechanism to perform the signature verification of container images and restricting which container images can be deployed on the Kura platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Eclipse Kura container authenticity and allowlist enforcement feature is designed to address container authenticity concerns, by providing a mechanism to perform the signature verification of container images and restricting which container images can be deployed on the Eclipse Kura instance.
```

This is achieved by implementing the following flow:

![](./images/container-auth-high-level-flow.png){ width="600" }

Description of the flow:

> - **Monitoring**: Kura monitors the container engine events. When a "container start" event is triggered it intercepts the information regarding the image used to spin up the container and starts performing the check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Monitoring**: Eclipse Kura monitors the container engine events. When a "container start" event is triggered, it intercepts the information regarding the image used to spin up the container and starts performing the container authenticity checks.
```

> - **Allowlist** Firstly it checks if the digest of the image used to run the container can be found in the Kura allowlist. If so, the container is allowed to run. If not, Kura proceeds with the image signature verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Allowlist**: Firstly, it checks if the digest of the image used to run the container can be found in the Eclipse Kura allowlist. If so, the container is allowed to run. If not, Eclipse Kura proceeds with the image signature verification.
```

- **Signature verification**: If no trust anchor (i.e. a public key or a X509 certificate depending on the signature mechanism) is available for the verification process to happen, the container is not allowed to run. If one is available, the image signature is verified and the allowlist is updated accordingly.

> This flow applies to both containers managed by Kura itself and containers ran directly by the user via CLI and allows for a fine-grained control over the container images that can be deployed on the Kura platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This flow applies to both containers managed by Eclipse Kura itself and containers ran directly by the user via CLI, allowing for a fine-grained control over the container images that can be deployed on the Eclipse Kura instance.
```

> - **Unmanaged containers**: Kura allows the user to define a list of container images that can be deployed on the platform. This is done by adding the image digests to the allowlist. When a container is started, Kura checks if the image digest is in the allowlist and, if so, allows the container to run. This is meant to be used by users who, for any reason, need to run a container _outside_ the Kura framework but still want the safety guarantees provided by pinning the images to a specific digest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Unmanaged containers**: Eclipse Kura allows the user to define a list of container images that can be deployed on the platform. This is done by adding the image digests to the allowlist. When a container is started, Eclipse Kura checks if the image digest is in the allowlist and, if so, allows the container to run. This is meant to be used by users who, for any reason, need to run a container _outside_ the Eclipse Kura framework but still want the safety guarantees provided by pinning the images to a specific digest.
```

> - **Managed containers**: Kura also allows the user, for containers ran by Kura itself, to provide a trust anchor to be used for the signature verification process. This allows the user to use a _mutable_ tag when specifying the container image, without giving up the required authenticity checks. Onche the image is verified its digest is stored within the Kura allowlist allowing it to be ran both from Kura and the CLI without the need for an internet connection. When a new image is published the user can simply trigger the pull and the verification process will update the digest automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Managed containers**: For containers ran by the framework, Eclipse Kura also allows the user to provide a trust anchor to be used for the signature verification process. This allows the user to use a _mutable_ tag when specifying the container image, without giving up the required authenticity checks. Once the image is verified, its digest is stored within the Eclipse Kura allowlist, permitting it to be ran both from Eclipse Kura and the CLI without the need for an Internet connection. When a new image is published, the user can simply trigger the pull. The verification process will update the digest automatically.
```

> Note that the user can still directly provide an image digest when running a Kura-managed container, bypassing the signature verification process. This is meant to be used when the user is sure about the image authenticity and does not want to go through the verification process or the image was not signed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the user can still directly provide an image digest when running an Eclipse Kura-managed container. This will prevent the Eclipse Kura automatic signature verification process to run. This feature is meant to be used when the user is sure about the image authenticity and does not want to go through the verification process or the image was not signed.
```

Not sure about this sentence: "This feature is meant to be used when the user is sure about the image authenticity and does not want to go through the verification process or the image was not signed." as it may be misleading in my opinion. Maybe we need to rewrite it

Reviewer 2: I'm answering this one since I originally wrote this.

The idea here is to explain the fact that the user can set directly the image digest in case:
- they already **trust** the image and thus don't require the signing verification process to be performed (example scenario: they downloaded and performed the image signature verification on their workstation and thus already know it can be trusted)
- the image was not signed in the first place but they still **trust** that image

A better way to put this then would be:

> This feature is meant to be used when
> -  the user already ensured the image authenticity and does not want to go through the verification process again
> - the image was not signed but the user still wants the enforcement trust guarantees provided by Eclipse Kura

What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Addressed in d7d9bc47d06b1768e30c397aeb278882ac4b0d9b

> Note that the user can still directly provide an image digest when running a Eclipse Kura-managed container, bypassing the signature verification process. This is meant to be used when the user is sure about the image authenticity and does not want to go through the verification process or the image was not signed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the user can still directly provide an image digest when running an Eclipse Kura-managed container. This will prevent the Eclipse Kura automatic signature verification process to run. This feature is meant to be used when:

- the user already ensured the image authenticity and does not want to go through the verification process again
- the image was not signed but the user still wants the enforcement trust guarantees provided by Eclipse Kura
```

## Unmanaged containers

> Regarding those containers not managaed from Kura, the Container Orchestration service provides a security feature which dictates the containers allowed to run on the system. This feature can be enabled or disabled through the `Allowlist Enforcement Enabled` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regarding the containers not managed by Eclipse Kura, the Container Orchestration service provides a security feature which enforces the containers allowed to run on the system. This feature can be enabled or disabled through the `Allowlist Enforcement Enabled` option.
```

This mechanism leverages the concept of _digest_, which is a unique and immutable identifier for a container image: it is therefore an excellent mean to identify the image from which a container was created.

> Given the above, Kura allows the user to provide a list of container image digests in the `Container Image Allowlist` field, in the form of newline-separated strings: when a container is started on the host system (whether it is launched by Kura or by a terminal CLI), Kura retrieves the image from which the container was created, extracts the digest and verifies that it is present in the allowlist provided during service configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the above, Eclipse Kura allows the user to provide a list of container image digests in the `Container Image Allowlist` field, in the form of newline-separated strings: when a container is started on the host system (whether it is launched by Eclipse Kura or by a terminal CLI), Eclipse Kura retrieves the image from which the container was created, extracts the digest and verifies that it is present in the allowlist provided during service configuration.
```

> If the image digest is present, the container is allowed to proceed without interference, otherwise it is immediately stopped and deleted from the host system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the image digest is present and matches the container's one, it is then allowed to run without interference. Otherwise, it is immediately stopped and deleted from the host system.
```

> A similar behaviour is performed at Kura startup or when the enforcement is enabled at runtime: if there are already containers on the device (whether they are started or stopped) and the enforcement is activated, Kura extracts the digests from the containers and compares them with those in the allowlist. Again, containers that have been created from images whose digests are in the allowlist will be left intact, otherwise they will be stopped and deleted from the descriptors list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A similar behaviour is performed at Eclipse Kura startup or when the enforcement is enabled at runtime: if there are already containers on the device (whether they are started or stopped) and the enforcement is activated, Eclipse Kura extracts the digests from the containers and compares them with those in the allowlist. Containers that have been created from images whose digests are in the allowlist will be left running, otherwise they will be stopped and deleted from the descriptors list.
```

The verification is performed by intersecting the list of digests extracted by the containers and the one provided in the configuration: in this way, an empty intersection will result in a failing verification, while a non-empty one means that the image digests is equal to one of the allowlist entries.

![Enforcement Flow](./images/container-orchestration-provider-enforcement-flow.png)

### Example scenarios

A user wants to leverage the container enforcement in order to let only docker containers started from an image named `foo_image` to be run on the device. To do this, they should enable the Container Enforcement by setting the `Allowlist Enforcement Enabled` to `true`, and fill the `Container Image Allowlist` field with the digest of the `foo_image` docker image (i.e.`sha256:0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000` in the example below).

> ![Container Orchestration Provider Enfrocement](./images/container-orchestration-provider-enforcement.png)

Reviewer 2: Fix ASAP

```suggestion
![Container Orchestration Provider Enforcement](./images/container-orchestration-provider-enforcement.png)
```

#### Startup of the Enforcement Feature

Let's suppose that on the device there are already two containers running, one created from the `foo_image` an one from an image named `unwanted_image` with digest `sha256:9999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999`. Once the enforcement starts with the configuration previously described, it extracts the digests of both containers and checks if they're included in the provided allowlist: in this case, the container originating from the `foo_image` will be allowed to run, while the one created from the `unwanted_image` will be stopped and deleted, because its digest is not included in the allowlist.

> The same happens also in case the containers are stopped: if the digests is verified, they'll be left in the descriptors list in the Stopped state, otherwise they'll be deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same happens also for already stopped containers: if the digests is verified, they'll be left in the descriptors list in the Stopped state, otherwise they'll be deleted.
```

#### Running Container After Enforcement Feature Startup

> After the starting phase just described, Kura will continuously monitor the activity of the docker engine. Whenever a container is started on the device, it will check the image digest from which the container was created, comparing it to the ones inside the allowlist: if the container is created from the `foo_image` docker image, it will be allowed to start, otherwise it will be stopped and deleted. If the user wants to add more than one allowed image, for example one named `wanted_image` with digest `sha256:1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111`), it just needs to add it to the newline-separated list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the starting phase just described, Eclipse Kura will continuously monitor the activity of the docker engine. Whenever a container is started on the device, it will check the image digest from which the container was created, comparing it to the ones inside the allowlist: if the container is created from the `foo_image` docker image, it will be allowed to start, otherwise it will be stopped and deleted. If the user wants to add more than one allowed image, for example one named `wanted_image` with digest `sha256:1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111`), it just needs to add it to the newline-separated list.
```

> ![Container Orchestration Provider Enfrocement Multiple Digests](./images/container-orchestration-provider-enforcement-multiple-digests.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Container Orchestration Provider Enforcement Multiple Digests](./images/container-orchestration-provider-enforcement-multiple-digests.png)
```

> ## Managed containers and Container Signature verification

Reviewer 2: This is the section corresponding to the "Unmanaged containers" one. I would keep the name similar to highlight their relationship. Also because it corresponds to the content of the "High-level flow" paragraph

```suggestion
## Managed containers
```

> As explained in the previous section, Managed Containers (i.e. `org.eclipse.kura.container.provider.ContainerInstance`s) support Container Signature validation. To do so we introduced a new API: the [`ContainerSignatureValidationService`](https://github.com/eclipse/kura/blob/develop/kura/org.eclipse.kura.api/src/main/java/org/eclipse/kura/container/signature/ContainerSignatureValidationService.java).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As explained in the previous section, Managed Containers (i.e. `org.eclipse.kura.container.provider.ContainerInstance`s) support Container Signature validation. To do so a new API has been introduced: the [`ContainerSignatureValidationService`](https://github.com/eclipse/kura/blob/develop/kura/org.eclipse.kura.api/src/main/java/org/eclipse/kura/container/signature/ContainerSignatureValidationService.java).
```

> Currently there's three main mechanism for container signature verification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, there are three main mechanism for container signature verification:
```

- [Docker Content Trust (DCT)](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/trust/) a.k.a. Notary V1
- [Notation](https://notaryproject.dev/) a.k.a. Notary V2
- [Sigstore's Cosign](https://docs.sigstore.dev/signing/quickstart/)

> This newly introduced service allows Kura to have multiple different Services implementing this interface and thus support all major signature mechanisms. A reference implementation for the `ContainerSignatureValidationService` is the `DummyContainerSignatureValidationService` available [in Kura `examples` folder](https://github.com/eclipse/kura/blob/develop/kura/examples/org.eclipse.kura.example.container.signature.validation/src/org/eclipse/kura/example/container/signature/validation/DummyContainerSignatureValidationService.java) for anyone wanting to implement an alternative `ContainerSignatureValidationService`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This newly introduced service allows Eclipse Kura to have multiple different Services implementing this interface and, thus, support all major signature mechanisms. A reference implementation for the `ContainerSignatureValidationService` is the `DummyContainerSignatureValidationService` available [in Kura `examples` folder](https://github.com/eclipse/kura/blob/develop/kura/examples/org.eclipse.kura.example.container.signature.validation/src/org/eclipse/kura/example/container/signature/validation/DummyContainerSignatureValidationService.java) for anyone wanting to implement an alternative `ContainerSignatureValidationService`.
```

> When a `ContainerSignatureValidationService` is installed on Kura, it gets automatically registered among the available validators and will be used to perform the signature validation. Under the hood, the `ContainerInstance` has a list of the available `ContainerSignatureValidationService` providers that, upon receiving a configuration update, it interrogates to check whether the requested container image is authentic using the provided **Trust Anchor**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a `ContainerSignatureValidationService` is installed on Eclipse Kura, it gets automatically registered among the available validators and will be used to perform the signature validation. Under the hood, the `ContainerInstance` has a list of the available `ContainerSignatureValidationService` providers that, upon receiving a configuration update, it interrogates to check whether the requested container image is authentic using the provided **Trust Anchor**.
```

- If even _only one_ service reports the signature as valid, the image signature is considered valid.
- If none of the available services reports the signature as valid, the image signature is considered _not valid_.

> This means that Kura doesn't need to prompt the user for selecting the correct `ContainerSignatureValidationService` when performing the check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that Eclipse Kura doesn't need to prompt the user for selecting the correct `ContainerSignatureValidationService` when performing the check.
```

> This means that Kura doesn't need to prompt the user for selecting the correct `ContainerSignatureValidationService` when performing the check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that Eclipse Kura doesn't need to prompt the user for selecting the correct `ContainerSignatureValidationService` when performing the check.
```

> This means that Kura doesn't need to prompt the user for selecting the correct `ContainerSignatureValidationService` when performing the check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that Eclipse Kura doesn't need to prompt the user for selecting the correct `ContainerSignatureValidationService` when performing the check.
```

> Once the image signature is validated, the image digest is stored in the Kura snapshot and added to the `ContainerOrchestratorService` allowlist (see section above). A container whose image digest is available in the allowlist won't be validated again, therefore after the initial check, the internet connection is no longer required for it work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the image signature is validated, the image digest is stored in the Eclipse Kura snapshot and added to the `ContainerOrchestratorService` allowlist (see section above). A container whose image digest is available in the allowlist won't be validated again, therefore after the initial check, the internet connection is no longer required for it to work.
```

![Schema with disabled instances](./images/schemaWithoutInstances.png)

As it can be seen from the image, the merged `Enforcement Allowlist` box doesn't contain the digest associated to the Container Instance, because, being it disabled, the corresponding digest is ignored. If the enforcement is enabled and a container with digest *DIGEST Z* is started, it will then be stopped and deleted, because its digest won't be included in the allowlist.

Finally, everytime a *Container Image Enforcement Digest* option is modified, or the ContainerInstance is disabled or deleted, the enforcement feature will perform a check on all the already running containers. This is done because, if the digest that was previously provided has changed after an instance update, or removed due to disabling or deleting the instance, those containers that were previously authorised by this digest are no longer allowed to run. So they must be stopped and deleted.

!!! warning

    The digests provided through Container Instances allow running also container started by the **C**ommand**L**ine**I**nterface or by other Container Instances in the framework, even without providing the digest.
    

>     But keep in mind that if the ContainerInstance is disabled (or its digest option changes) the enforcement feature will stop and delete the containers that are no longer matching the provided digest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It has to be considered that, if the ContainerInstance is disabled (or its digest option changes), the enforcement feature will stop and delete the containers that are no longer matching the provided digest.
```

>     Be careful, then, to rely only on the digests set in the ContainerInstances options. If you think you need to run containers from the CLI, it is preferable to use the allowlist of the Container Orchestration Service. For the Container Instances, is a good practise to provide a digest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The user needs to be careful, then, to rely only on the digests set in the ContainerInstances options. If the user will need to run containers from the CLI, it is preferable to use the allowlist of the Container Orchestration Service. For the Container Instances, is a good practise to provide a digest.
```

#### Container Signature Verification

> If the *Container Image Enforcement Digest* option is not provided, Kura will proceed with the Signature Verification: this process tries to extract the digest of the image from which the container was started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the *Container Image Enforcement Digest* option is not provided, Eclipse Kura will proceed with the Signature Verification: this process tries to extract the digest of the image from which the container was started.
```

> Let's then suppose that we are back at the [beginning of the previous example](#container-instance-digest), with a blank Container Orchestration Service allowlist and a not given Container Instance Digest, but this time a *Trust Anchor* option is given: in this case Kura will start the Signature Verification Process, in order to extract the digest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's then suppose that we are back at the [beginning of the previous example](#container-instance-digest), with a blank Container Orchestration Service allowlist and a not given Container Instance Digest, but this time a *Trust Anchor* option is given: in this case Eclipse Kura will start the Signature Verification Process, in order to extract the digest.
```
